---
layout: tufte
title: "Philosophy and Foundations of Mathematics Reading Group"
author: Sina Hazratpour
excerpt: "with focus on the philosophical concerns of the 21st century mathematics"
tags: 
  - mathematical proofs 
  - mathematical intuition
  - the future of mathematics
  - logic
  - type theory
  - category theory
  - computation
  - automated theorem provers
  - interactive theorem provers 
permalink: /posts/2021/01/phil_maths_reading_group
date: 2021-01-01
use_math: true
location: "Utrecht, NL"
comments: true
---

## Goals and hopes


The main goal of this reading group is to understand how close the human has come to the point where his machines can do mathematics for him. Some mathematicians, such the Fields medalists Paul Cohen, Tim Gowers, Maxim Kontsevich, and Vladimir Voedodsky  have all at some point predicted that computers will be able to out-reason mathematicians in the 21st century. But is that really plausible?

To make any sound judgment on this question, we need to better understand 

1. What is (and what should be regarded as) mathematical progress? 

2. What is (and what should be regarded as) mathematical proof? Do we always need formal proofs to do mathematics? 

3. What is the role of human intuition in mathematical reasoning and in mathematical proofs? Where do new ideas in mathematics come from?  

4. What is the role of natural language in mathematics and how different is it from the mathematical languages in which the proofs are written? What are the limits of our mathematical languages compared to our natural language where we reason about mathematics at a meta level? And could these limits be problematic for the computers to do mathematics equally or even better than humans?  

5.  What is the machine mathematics? What are automated theorem provers (ATPs) and interactive theorem provers (ITPS) and what are their differences? Can the advances in AI, ML, and neuroscience bridge the gap between ATP+ITP and the human mind when it comes to doing (creating/discovering) interesting new mathematics? 

6. Will we have two mathematics in future: the machine mathematics, and the human mathematics? And how do we, humans, react to such a situation? Will we simply accept the proofs generated by computers which conceivably could not be understood by any human being at all?  Will such proofs have the same status as human generated proofs

These are pressing questions and we need to ransack various philosophies and foundations of mathematics that have been thought before us; they give us radically different insights to the questions above and presents us with cast territories of philosophical though. In the first session of our reading group, I will give an introductory talk charting out a basic map of these territories, and establishing some reading resources that get us going.  




### Which philosophies? which foundations? 

I believe in epistemological anarchism, that is if needed we have to be receptive to ideas from the most disparate and apparently far-flung domains, even at the price of losing the comfort of our nests. Therefore, in this reading group we will remain open to all ideas and philosophies (things such as paraconsistent logic and fictionalism) as long as they are helpful to our goals discussed in above. Hopefully, this reading group will be a place for deep learning (and deep unlearning, i.e. unindoctorination) as well as unashamedly free speculations.   

We will review the main tenets of the following philosophies and foundations of mathematics: 

  * Constructivism and Intuitionism
  * Structuralism
  * Formalism
  * Fictionalism 
  * Cognitivism  


### Resources 



The following materials will be useful:


* Introductory reading on the philosophy of mathematics
  + Mark Colyvan. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mathematics 
  + Øystein Linnebo. Philosophy of Mathematics


* Introductory mixed resources: some selected papers to get an introduction to some of the most interesting and variegated issues in the philosophy of mathematics  

   * [On Proof and Progress in Mathematics](https://arxiv.org/pdf/math/9404236.pdf) 
   * Saunsers MacLane. Mathematics Form and Function
   * Richard Tieszen. What is a proof? 
   * Where does mathematics come from? 
     + https://www.kavlifoundation.org/science-spotlights/brain-or-universe-%E2%80%93-where-does-math-come
     + Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being 
     The authors claim that the mathematics we used to describe as disembodied is in fact embodied. Humans use their bodies, mind, and brain to both form and understand mathematics. All mathematical content resides in embodied ideas and many of the most basic, as well as the most sophisticated, mathematical ideas are metaphorical. 
   * Penrose, L. S. and Penrose, R. Impossible Objects, a Special Kind of Illusion, 1958. British Journal of Psychology, 49: 31-33.
   * Noson S. Yanofsky. The Outer Limits of Reason: What Science, Mathematics, and Logic Cannot Tell Us. 
   * Hermann Weyl. Mind and nature: Selected writings on philosophy, mathematics and physics. 2002. Edited and with an introduction by Peter Pesic. 
   * Colin McLarty. The rising sea: Grothendieck on simplicity and generality
   * Howard Stein. Logos, Logic, and Logistike. Phillip Kitcher, eds., History and Philosophy of Modern Mathematics. University of Minnesota Press 238–259, 1988.
   * Robert L. Long. Remarks on the history and philosophy of mathematics. The American Mathematical Monthly, 93(8):609--619, 1986.
   * Robert S.Tragesser, Three insufficiently attended to aspects of most mathematical proofs: phenomenological studies


* Thematized materials:
   
   * Structuralism and category theory 
     + Dedekind
     + Paul Benacerraf. What numbers could not be. Philosophical Review, 74:47--73, 1965
     + Steve Awodey. Structure in mathematics and logic: A categorical perspective. Philosophia Mathematica, 4(3):209--237, 1996
     + Steve Awodey. Structuralism, Invariance, and Univalence. Philosophia mathematica 22(1):1–11, 2014.
     + Jeremy Avigad. Number theory and elementary arithmetic. Philosophia mathematica, 3(11):257--284, 2003.
     
    
   * Constructive mathematics and type theory 
     + Per Martin-Lof. An Intuitionistic Theory of Types. In G.Sambin and Jan.Smith’s Twenty Five Years of Constructive Type Theory. Oxford Logic Guides Clarendon press, Oxford, 1998.
     + Charles Parsons, The Impredicativity of induction
      


   * Non-classical logic
     + Priest, G. 2008. An Introduction to Non-Classical Logic: From If to Is, 2nd edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     + Beall, JC, and van Fraassen, B. C. 2003. Possibilities and Paradox, Oxford: Oxford University Press

   * Formalism 
     + 
     + Gerhard Heinzmann and Hannes Leitgeb. Formalism, Formalization, Intuition and Understanding in Mathematics: From Informal Practice to Formal Systems and Back Again. Université de Lorraine/CNRS, Nancy 2018.

   * On Proofs: 

   * Syntax-Semantics distinction 

   * Mathematics as a community activity 
     + decay 
     + loss of conceptual understanding 
     + 

   


  * Mathematical notations and semiotics
    + Cajori, F. 1993. A History of Mathematical Notation, New York: Dover Reprints. (Original published in two volumes by Open Court in London in 1929.)
    + 

   We will also read from the original resources; 